---
layout: post
title: "Denial"
image: "images/volker_1924.jpg"
description: ""
category: posts
---

Tell a thirty-something male who thinks of himself as a nice guy that, simply by being a male, he contributes to the perpetuation of male hegemony ; you'll be answered with bewilderment and a vehement denial.

Tell a Green-leaning, nature-loving forty-something who flies regularly to a ski or hiking weekend that she's among the worst polluters on earth ; you'll be answered with a guilty shrug.

Tell a Labour-voting sixty-something who was born in the middle class and who acquired a nice loft in a not-yet gentrified neighborhood of London thirty years ago that she is now among the top 1% wealthiest Britons and that when the Tories push tax cuts, they do it for her, too ; you'll be answered with a confused look, probably followed by a tirade against the rich.

### Preserving one's self-image

Why we tend to deny the obvious is fairly easy to grasp. A young white male professional does not see himself as an oppressor. Even if he understands that his hiring choices or his friendships at the office, _by themselves_, contribute to helping other white males at the detriment of others, he is unlikely to accept it as evidence of his participation to a system of domination. To do so would force him to reconsider his perception of self. He sees himself as a nice guy, by opposition to the rapists and Weinsteins of this world ; to admit that he is closer to them that he would like to would rip apart his self-image.

When something does not fit in with the identity we constructed for ourselves, we simply refuse to accept it. Nowhere is that more obvious than with self-proclaimed nature-lovers who use airplanes. A short haul flight (Berlin-Geneva, say) emits as much CO<sub>2</sub> per passenger as you would save with a whole year's worth of recycling.<sup><a name='note_1' id='#note_1' class='note_anchor' href='#foot_1'>1</a></sup> Despite this easy-to-do math, few of the tourists whom you meet hiking in the Alps think of themselves as destroyers of nature. On the contrary, they probably look down on those who do not recycle and keep their old light bulbs, even if these two actions have very little impact on emissions.

Such denial is not hypocrisy, but a survival mechanism. For a nature lover to make any significant change to her emissions would imply not flying at all and, as a consequence, not being able to see much of the nature she so loves. Moving forward, reducing emissions means having fewer children (by far the most important environment-related choice one makes). Having fewer children easily leads to the next logical step, that one's very existence contributes to the perpetuation of the systems in opposition to which one's identity is defined. Denial is what we need to keep living in a sound psychological state.

### The aristocrat and the citizen

That denial is necessary to prevent suicide does not mean that nothing can be done to bring our self-images in line with our convictions. Revolutionary aristocrats provide the perfect example.

In the late 18<sup>th</sup> century, absolute rule of the monarch over his subject was the norm. Some aristocrats certainly refused to admit that they, as aristocrats, had anything to do with the suffering of the common folk and with their discontent. Others, having read the writers of the Enlightenment, saw that changes were needed. Of course, their rejection of absolutism was not without self-interest, especially in the European colonies. For creole aristocrats, the appeal of the ideas of the Enlightenment was stronger because it provided an ideological basis upon which they could argue for independence.

However, these aristocrats did not call for a reform of absolutism where they would have a little less privileges. They understood that their quality of aristocrats, which influenced everything they had been since birth, was the problem. And instead of not having children or committing suicide, they advocated for an entirely new system, without monarchy, without privileges and without aristocrats. They would stop being aristocrats and become "citizens".

In 1819, Simón Bolívar, born to an aristocratic family of Caracas, said before the Congress of Angostura, a gathering of revolutionaries, that the need was for "equality to _recast_ men in a single whole" (emphasis mine).<sup><a name='note_2' id='#note_2' class='note_anchor' href='#foot_2'>2</a></sup> He made very clear that entirely new concepts were needed for aristocrats to be able to join in the revolution and contribute to overthrowing monarchic rule. The revolutionaries of Latin America invented the concept of the equality of all citizens of the nation<sup><a name='note_3' id='#note_3' class='note_anchor' href='#foot_3'>3</a></sup> (until then, revolutionaries had rarely included old-regime elites in their plans), upon which the nation states of the 19<sup>th</sup> and 20<sup>th</sup> century were built.

### Finding new self images

Arguments will not help combat denial among those who contribute to systems of domination and pollution. Instead, we need to invent new identities, as South American aristocrats did two centuries ago. This is not as hopeless as it sounds. Car ownership, for instance, was a key component of the identity of rich young men and women in Europe and in the United States in the second half of the 20<sup>th</sup> century, and ceased to be.

We could, for instance, abandon gender as a component of identity. Eye color does not define one's identity, we don't treat at people with colored contact lenses as mentally ill, we don't have separate toilets for blue-eyed and brown-eyed people. And while eye color does not imply a different attitude to one's body, many conditions do, starting with diabetes ; we don't force separate bathrooms on them either.

We could try to understand how biking became an element of identity among some of the rich and try to push for a similar change regarding airborne travel. Making bus or train travel cooler than flying sounds far-fetched, but is probably possible.

These new identities we will certainly provoke new, necessary denials of reality from those who adopt them. After all, the equality advocated by the Bolivarian and other revolutionaries was a fiction that needed racism to function<sup><a name='note_4' id='#note_4' class='note_anchor' href='#foot_4'>4</a></sup> - maybe not much of an improvement over absolutism. This does not mean that we should not try.

_Cover picture: Karl Völker, Industriebild, 1924._



<h4>Newsletter</h4>
<p>In case you want to read my next essay in your e-mail inbox, type you email below and you'll be all set.</p>
<form style="padding:3px;" action="https://tinyletter.com/nkb" method="post" target="popupwindow" onsubmit="window.open('https://tinyletter.com/nkb', 'popupwindow', 'scrollbars=yes,width=800,height=600');return true"><p><label for="tlemail">Enter your email address</label></p><p><input type="text" style="width:300px" name="email" id="tlemail" /></p><input type="hidden" value="1" name="embed"/><input type="submit" value="Subscribe" /></form>


 <a name='notes' ></a>

### Notes 



<a href='#note_1' name='foot_1' data-text='Wynes, Seth, and Kimberly A. Nicholas. ‘The climate mitigation gap: education and government recommendations miss the most effective individual actions’. Environmental Research Letters 12.7 (2017): 074024.'>1.</a> Wynes, Seth, and Kimberly A. Nicholas. [The climate mitigation gap: education and government recommendations miss the most effective individual actions](https://archive.is/20180331/http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/aa7541/meta). Environmental Research Letters 12.7 (2017): 074024.


<a href='#note_2' name='foot_2' data-text='Lynch, John. ‘Simón Bolivar and the age of revolution’. ISA Working Papers 10 (1983).'>2.</a> Lynch, John. [Simón Bolivar and the age of revolution](https://archive.is/20180331/http://sas-space.sas.ac.uk/3532/1/B48_-_Simon_Bolivar_and_the_Age_of_Revolution.pdf). ISA Working Papers 10 (1983).


<a href='#note_3' name='foot_3' data-text='On the importance of Latin America in modern nationalism, see Anderson, Benedict. Imagined communities: Reflections on the origin and spread of nationalism. Verso Books, 2006.'>3.</a> On the importance of Latin America in modern nationalism, see Anderson, Benedict. _Imagined communities: Reflections on the origin and spread of nationalism_. Verso Books, 2006.


<a href='#note_4' name='foot_4' data-text='I wrote about the relationship between liberalism and racism at length in ‘The Humanist Paradox’ but don’t take my word for it, read Wallerstein, Immanuel. The ideological tensions of capitalism: universalism versus racism and sexism. Race, nation, class: Ambiguous identities (1991): 29-36.'>4.</a> I wrote about the relationship between liberalism and racism at length in [The Humanist Paradox](https://archive.is/20180331/http://blog.nkb.fr/humanism-racism) but don't take my word for it, read Wallerstein, Immanuel. _The ideological tensions of capitalism: universalism versus racism and sexism._ Race, nation, class: Ambiguous identities (1991): 29-36.
